---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Protecting Your Digital Rights
author: Aaron
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
excerpt: "Someone might be publishing one of your photographs right now. Without your
  permission.\r\n\r\nPhotographers today are faced with the very real possibility
  that their rights are being violated due to the simplicity that digital media brings
  to the act of duplication and distribution of their work. Your ability as a photographer
  to understand and apply the tools and techniques available to protect your copyrights
  will contribute largely to how easily someone else can wrongly profit from your
  work and how easily you can seek remedies for that infringement."
wordpress_id: 99
wordpress_url: http://www.singleservingphoto.com/2007/04/11/protecting-your-digital-rights/
date: '2007-04-11 21:51:22 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-04-12 01:51:22 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- technology
- howto
- copyright
- law
- research
- tips
comments:
- id: 764
  author: photographyVoter.com
  author_email: ''
  author_url: http://www.photographyvoter.com/story.php?id=290
  date: '2007-04-27 08:14:56 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-04-27 12:14:56 -0400'
  content: |-
    Protecting Your Digital Rights; Watermarking, Orphan Works, Technology...

    Your ability as a photographer to understand and apply the tools and techniques available to protect your copyrights will contribute largely to how easily someone else can wrongly profit from your work and how easily you can seek remedies for that infr...
- id: 766
  author: Paul
  author_email: info@photographyvoter.com
  author_url: http://www.photographyvoter.com
  date: '2007-04-27 08:54:48 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-04-27 12:54:48 -0400'
  content: Excellent, in-depth article (perfect lunch-time read). Many thanks for
    that..
- id: 833
  author: Andrew Ferguson
  author_email: cabbit@goldengod.net
  author_url: http://www.goldengod.net
  date: '2007-06-12 17:46:33 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-06-12 21:46:33 -0400'
  content: |-
    Wow man!

    This is a hell of a read :)

    I found it via PopPhoto Flash (I think) and I gotta say I'm impressed. I'm also glad to hear I'm not the only one who find watermarking incredibly tacky and ugly.

    I've added you to my RSS feeds and blogroll :)
- id: 834
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-06-12 20:15:30 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-06-13 00:15:30 -0400'
  content: Thanks, Andrew, I'm glad you enjoyed reading it as much as I enjoyed putting
    it together!
- id: 835
  author: Marilyn
  author_email: savystunr@yahoo.com
  author_url: ''
  date: '2007-06-13 12:52:44 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-06-13 16:52:44 -0400'
  content: Hi, The meta data info has been around for a while. I think you were way
    harsh about judging photographers who choose to watermark their work - and then
    of course you end by saying you do it too! I hope someone does to you what they've
    done to me more than once - steal and resample your images for profit. Then your
    tune might change. Maybe your work doesn't ever get stolen. You might want to
    check your ego and attitude of "Do as I say, Not as I do!" Insults you hurled:"To
    me, a watermark SCREAMS OPPORTUNISM, perhaps a small drop of GREED, and utter
    DISTRUST. The level of greed and distrust that I perceive is directly proportional
    to the size and AUDACITY of the watermark." OPPORTUNISM? Someone is an opportunist
    because they want to protect their work from thieves? GREED because they protect
    their own work? That's just nuts. DISTRUST - It's the internet and people steal
    photos every day but that doesn't make it o.k.!!! Copyright infringement of any
    kind is against the law, so for you to be flip about it and put people down for
    protecting their work seems strange to me. As far as size goes, I am wondering
    about the size of your ego to be so judgemental and negative. I bet money you
    don't have the nerve to post my comment at all or without altering it. Honestly
    - I hope you rethink your harsh judgements. I use my website to back up the contacts
    that I make in person. If they can't see that they like my work, and make and
    appointment because the watermark "bugs" them, then they weren't serious in the
    first place and would be wasting my time. Making a living in Photography has changed
    - it's gotten harder so to make it easier for thieves is a disservice to all photographers.
    The FLAW with your thinking is without them knowing about meta data, they will
    go ahead and steal it, use it because the chances of you finding out are slim.
- id: 836
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-06-13 14:18:32 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-06-13 18:18:32 -0400'
  content: |-
    Well, Marilyn, I think you have underestimated me. I am open to hearing every point of view, and I have posted your comment, completely unedited, so that everyone who reads my site can recognize that I'm not always right, nor am I universally agreed with.

    I think that despite my strong phrasing, you have misinterpreted the message I was trying to get across, which is simply that audacious watermarking does little to prevent misappropriation of images on the Internet and more to distract from their content.

    I am skeptical that an image presented on the Internet for the purposes of a gallery would provide much in the way of profit for any third party; such images are of too small a pixel dimension (or at least, should be) to be reproduced in any pleasing way. Images used improperly on other websites are a fact of life, and one that can be combated using technologies such as Digimarc. Still, the damage done by such re-posting of images is, I feel, largely overestimated.

    To what degree does the availability of a 600-square-pixel image impact sales to real customers whose needs are much greater? As you said, you use your website to back up contacts you make in real life, with people who are genuinely interested in legitimate use of your work. The same fallacy is demonstrated by the Recording Industry Association of America, who claims that every mp3 download is a lost sale. In actuality, it is not likely that even 5% of the songs downloaded illegally would have been purchased by those individuals, and those individuals have a tendency to purchase the songs and albums they feel are worth the money in the first place. The iTunes Music Store should be a resounding example of that theory.

    That said, we all have our ways of doing things and there is no "right" way or "wrong" way; I simply stated my opinion and I thank you for taking the time to state yours.
- id: 1089
  author: Rhonda
  author_email: robbins@mesanetworks.net
  author_url: ''
  date: '2007-12-10 13:03:59 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-10 17:03:59 -0500'
  content: "I had taken a picture of a preying mantis and used it as an avatar on
    a public forum.  I had quoted a post that has now been made national coverage
    and has my avatar posted along with it.  Do I have any rights and can I get them
    to take it off.  I have already contacted the news who posted this but have not
    heard back from them and they have not removed my avatar.  \r\nThanks"
- id: 1090
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-12-10 14:09:49 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-10 18:09:49 -0500'
  content: |-
    Hi Rhonda.

    I am not a lawyer, so it would not be correct or polite of me to make a specific judgment on your issue, but I can nonetheless share my _opinion_.

    When you posted the image to the forum site as your avatar, you were implicitly granting certain use rights for that image to the proprietors of that website, which would make it difficult for you to seek recourse against them. However, you said that the post in question "made national coverage," which indicates to me that maybe it appeared in the news media somehow.

    The fact is that the news media, through first amendment protections, probably carries practically no copyright infringement liability in this case. The _editorial_ use of photographic images and re-postings of website content, etc., is protected under "fair use," because it is not commercial, but rather editorial. It is precisely these protections that make our society free.

    If anything, you should look at the bright side: your image has now been viewed by many people!
- id: 1091
  author: Rhonda
  author_email: robbins@mesanetworks.net
  author_url: ''
  date: '2007-12-10 14:42:56 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-10 18:42:56 -0500'
  content: Thanks Aaron.  I had a feeling that this would be the response.
---
Someone might be publishing one of your photographs right now. Without
your permission.

Photographers today are faced with the very real possibility that their
rights are being violated due to the simplicity that digital media
brings to the act of duplication and distribution of their work. Your
ability as a photographer to understand and apply the tools and
techniques available to protect your copyrights will contribute largely
to how easily someone else can wrongly profit from your work and how
easily you can seek remedies for that infringement.<span
id="more"></span><span id="more-99"></span>

This is a long article. I get into some detail about copyright law, the
implications of at least two types of self-attribution you can use to
assert your copyrights, the technical aspects of metadata and some of
its history, and more. But because I am considerate and I want the
impatient and lazy among you to be equally satisfied to have dropped by
(thank you, by the way), here are the major points:

* The Orphan Works Act of 2006 does not threaten to dilute your rights
as a copyright holder. Which is to say, it wouldn't even if it actually
_passed_, which it hasn't.\
 * There are two major forms of metadata, one older one and one newer
one, and you should learn how to use them properly.\
 * Watermarks are _so_ ugly.

Now, if you feel up to it, dive in.

An article ran in this month's issue of Shutterbug magazine called "How
to Protect Your Images: Photos on the Web Might Be Fair Game." The
article was written by Jon Canfield and centered around one specific
concern raised by a little piece of legislation called H.R. 5439 or, in
plain English, the "Orphan Works Act of 2006," which has not yet been
passed.

Setting aside for a moment the somewhat alarmist phrasing of the
article's title, which seems to imply that the government could declare
open season on copyrighted works on the Internet, and ignoring the
calculated impression a reader might get from the first two paragraphs
that the Orphan Works Act will do just that, Canfield offers several
good tips.

h2. Orphan Works Act of 2006

Before delving full-throttle into the nitty gritty of copyright law and
what you can do to protect yourself, I must first dispell concerns about
the Orphan Works Act of 2006. If you want to [read
it](http://www.publicknowledge.org/pdf/ow-act-2006.pdf), there it is, in
all of its PDF glory. So what is an "orphan work," anyway? An orphan
work is one whose copyright holder and rightful owner cannot be
reasonably discovered. The Act attempts to fill the void in current
copyright law where orphan works live. Canfield says:

bq. Boiled down to plain English, this act says that if a reasonable
effort is made to find the owner of an image, and that search is
unsuccessful, the work can be used at no charge and without credit to
the original creator.

There is mounting concern--legitimate concern--among the agencies of
various governments equivalent to our Copyright Office regarding the
fate of these creative works whose owners may not be outwardly apparent
or may have disappeared and left no next of kin, etc., etc. It's all
very legal and complicated, but suffice it to say, if you want to use a
painting that you found somewhere and nobody could identify its creator,
so you searched up and down for them but found nothing, you might use
that painting only to have the creator suddenly reveal him or herself
and sue you. And they could win.

The Orphan Works Act of 2006 seeks to "limit remedies" sought by the
creator of a work when their ownership status could not "reasonably" be
discovered. That doesn't mean, by any _stretch_ of the imagination,
that people could start using your photographs and somehow slip through
a loophole in copyright law that would absolve them of guilt. First and
foremost, the Orphan Works Act of 2006 hasn't even been passed, so none
of its provisions have any legal weight whatsoever. Second, even if it
had been passed, it doesn't give additional rights to copyright
infringers. In point of fact, it places the burden of proof on the
infringer to document their search for the proper owner of the copyright
in question and to further prove that they performed the search with
"reasonable diligence," making use of "reasonably available expert
assistance" and "reasonably available technology."

_Furthermore_, the Act also holds that if the infringer had
discovered, to any degree, the identity of the owner of the work, that
they must have provided attribution "in a manner reasonable under the
circumstances." In other words, if someone meant to use one of your
photographs but couldn't figure out exactly who you were, they would,
under the Orphan Works Act, be required to give you credit to the extent
they were able. If they only knew your first name, for instance, they
would have to use it in an attribution or fail to meet the criteria of
the Act's provisions.

What that means to you as a photographer is that you should be certain
of anyone's ability to locate you as the creator and owner of your work
with a _reasonable_ level of diligence. It doesn't necessarily mean
you have to plaster your name and website URL across the middle of your
images (although it could help; I'll get into that later), but it does
mean you have to make yourself available to be contacted and to do what
you think is reasonably expected of you to claim ownership of your work.
So what does that mean?

Let us assume that the Orphan Works Act will be signed into law. I hope
that I have allayed any fears that this Act could dissolve your rights
as creators outright, but as they say, you can never be too careful. The
Act clearly describes the level of diligence that is expected of an
infringer in their search for the owner of a work, and one of the
specific tools mentioned is "reasonably available technology," which is
what I assume Canfield latched onto when he dove into the topic of
_metadata_.

h2. Using Metadata

Metadata refers to one of two major types of non-image data that can be
embedded into certain image files. The first type is IPTC, which stands
for International Press Telecommunications Council. At least as far back
as the early '90s it has been possible to use Photoshop or a similar
tool to embed non-image data into the "header" of a Photoshop, JPEG, or
TIFF image using the method IPTC came up with. Eventually, though, Adobe
came along and decided there needed to be more data. Around 2001, Adobe
launched XMP, or Extensible Metadata Platform, which they hoped would
provide even more useful metadata space within popular image formats.
XMP also defines "synchronization" methods to move certain data fields
back and forth between itself and IPTC; Photoshop naturally supports
this.

Right now we're in a transitional period between IPTC and XMP formats.
Adobe envisions XMP basically absorbing IPTC, and although that has
already begun to happen with the strength of Photoshop and Lightroom as
the premiere metadata management tools in use, it's probably a good idea
to fill in every field you can regardless of which standard it's defined
in. In most applications that support metadata tagging, there is now a
section called "IPTC Core" and then another for XMP. It won't hurt you
to pay attention to both.

I should note that Aperture also supports XMP metadata, but I am a
Lightroom user so I won't be able to talk about Aperture's interface or
specific support. If you use Aperture and have anything to share about
metadata, please leave a comment.

h2. Watermarks

The most popular way to assert copyright on an image is to emblazon it
with your name and/or URL and/or a phrase such as "All Rights Reserved."
Personally, I find most "watermarks" to be distracting, distasteful, and
poorly executed. To me, a watermark screams opportunism, perhaps a small
drop of greed, and utter distrust. The level of greed and distrust that
I perceive is directly proportional to the size and audacity of the
watermark. Watermarks with outer glows, very thick lettering, or worst
of all _colors_ drive me up the wall. Musn't there be a way to
indicate ownership without stabbing your viewers in the eye with
Photoshop filters and text set in Papyrus?

To me, the watermark has two distinct purposes:

* To deter would-be thieves from snatching up your image and using it
for their own nefarious purposes.\
 * To increase awareness of (read: advertise) you and/or your website
to the people who would be most interested in it: people who look at
photographs.

Having a watermark probably doesn't deter the small-time offender, but I
don't think it's important. Someone who wants to spend the time to
Photoshop out the watermark and make a very poor inkjet print of your
photo because they wanted to hang it above their toilet is not the
person who was going to bring you fame or fortune in the first place.
Photographs prepared at web-viewable resolutions are virtually worthless
outside of the Internet, anyway; prints from images of that size are not
going to look very good, so the risk of being defrauded is marginal.

The copyright symbol itself and the "All Rights Reserved" phrase are so
ubiquitous these days that most folks don't even think twice before
copying things and using them in all sorts of bizarre personal efforts.
I say go for it; I'm a big supporter of derivative work and if you want
to wallpaper your house with web resolution copies of my photographs,
well, frankly I'd be honored.

The bottom line is that watermarks aren't tremendously effective
deterrents. The only way a watermark is going to truly deter a would-be
offender is if it covers the image in some distracting way. Doesn't that
defeat the purpose of showing off your work in the first place? It may
also be said that a visible watermark strengthens your legal copyright
claim. It may make such a claim more _convenient_ certainly, but in
the eyes of the law, metadata is just as strong. Even stronger would be
possessing the full-resolution version of the photograph. You have that
at least, right?

As you can see on this blog and in my gallery, I chose to apply a very
modest watermark to my work. My intent was to make it very easy for a
casual onlooker who discovers a photo of mine outside of this site to be
able to identify me, but also to disturb the original image and its
impact as little as possible. Coupled with metadata, I feel that this
solves the problem of asserting my legal rights to my work as well as
giving me a bit of casual advertising.

I am always ready and willing to answer questions and discuss particular
topics in greater detail. If you want to share your own experiences with
copyright, watermarking, or metadata, please leave a comment. You are
not required to sign up or log in to comment, but I encourage you to do
so.
