---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Giving Everything Away: Return to Creative Commons'
author: Aaron
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 157
wordpress_url: http://www.singleservingphoto.com/2007/12/09/giving-everything-away-return-to-creative-commons/
date: '2007-12-09 15:32:38 -0500'
date_gmt: '2007-12-09 19:32:38 -0500'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- art
- discussion
- copyright
- law
- business
- licensing
- rights
comments:
- id: 1084
  author: Brian Auer
  author_email: blog@epicedits.com
  author_url: http://blog.epicedits.com/2007/11/14/creative-commons-a-great-concept-ill-continue-to-employ/
  date: '2007-12-09 18:23:35 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-09 22:23:35 -0500'
  content: |-
    Nice write-up on this semi-controversial topic.  There did seem to be a bit of a flare-up in the discussion when Jim and I had posted our articles... but that's a good thing.  It gets people thinking about the issue at hand, and in our case (Jim and myself) we were able to provide two sides of a story to quite a few people.

    As you've stated in this article, CC is not for everybody.  Ultimately, it's up to the photographer to choose and understand their licensing options as a creative artist.
- id: 1085
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-12-09 18:34:58 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-09 22:34:58 -0500'
  content: |-
    Thanks for commenting, Brian. My main concern in this discussion is that Creative Commons seems to take a lot of criticism for outcomes that are actually the fault of photographers failing to practice due diligence.

    For example, the Creative Commons organization is a listed defendant in the ongoing legal proceedings involving Alison Chang. I'm sorry, but I can't see how anything that Virgin Mobile or the photographer in question did could be the responsibility of the Creative Commons!

    I hope that as our digital culture matures, artists will realize that reading licenses and terms of service on the websites they participate in is just as important as reading and understanding freelance contracts or the other legal devices they've have had to fiddle with since the beginning.
- id: 1086
  author: Jim Goldstein
  author_email: jimgoldstein@gmail.com
  author_url: http://www.jmg-galleries.com
  date: '2007-12-09 22:03:17 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-10 02:03:17 -0500'
  content: "Nice write up, but I do find this paragraph flawed.\n\nFundamentally,
    Creative Commons licenses were developed for creators who wish to allow uses of
    their work that typical “all rights reserved” declarations prohibit. If you never
    want anyone to use your work for anything without asking you, you probably don’t
    need the Creative Commons. You should probably also turn around and walk straight
    back through the last few decades because you would be ignoring everything that
    has changed since about 1980.\n\n\"All Rights Reserved\" prohibits use with out
    permission. Content designated with an \"All Rights Reserved\" license can be
    used in the same fashion as content marked with a Creative Commons license as
    long as permission is granted beforehand.   I'm not sure what the big deal is
    about this, but somehow \"All Rights Reserved\" and copyrights in general have
    been demonized as a byproduct of the fall out of P2P and music sharing disputes.
    \ \n\nAs for your last sentence I challenge you on this. What has fundamentally
    changed since the '80's that would make it a problem to use \"All Rights Reserved\"
    vs. Creative Commons? The fact that there is the Internet? Do bloggers cite articles
    any differently than they would in print? A hypertext link hardly justifies as
    broad a claim as you're making? VHS, DVD, music, written word, photographs, etc...
    its all the same... the difference is format, means of delivery and for the sake
    of this discussion permission of use. In the end it comes down to the courtesy
    of permission of use. I'd hardly expect that if I left my keys in my car that
    I'd be ok with someone using it with out asking first. Car, bike, skateboard,
    plane, etc... its property and has an inherent value. The same is true of these
    other pieces of intellectual property. By all means it is with in your right to
    put a sign on your car and give people permission to use the car as long as they
    read the fine print. Car or Photos... when it comes to a license or agreement
    that Creative Commons outlines you're right it is the property owners responsibility
    to know what they're getting into and that was as much a part of my post as anything
    else, but... its a mistake to think that you'll not be impacted by what happens
    downstream. Even Creative Commons had to burn time and money to get themselves
    out of being included in the lawsuit you mentioned. If you're a small time photographer
    you're likely not going to have the same resources as Creative Commons. \n\nThe
    point... when using Creative Commons or any license a photographer needs to be
    well educated and weigh the pros and cons. Much of Intellectual Property law in
    relation to Internet use is still being defined and challenged in our courts.
    That has to be factored in to what you choose to do with your photo licenses."
- id: 1087
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-12-09 22:42:28 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-10 02:42:28 -0500'
  content: |-
    Thanks for sharing your reactions, Jim, I'm glad that my article was interesting enough to warrant replies from both of its primary sources!

    I suppose I should provide some clarification for the first paragraph you cited. You're absolutely right that any creator can grant whatever rights they wish on a case-by-case basis if all rights are formally reserved. Creative Commons aims to remove some barriers from certain works that a creator wishes to make available unfettered to particular people under particular circumstances and for particular uses, and of course that approach isn't for everyone.

    I agree with you 100% that "a photographer needs to be well educated and weigh the pros and cons." One point that I wanted to make abundantly clear is that it is the creator's duty to practice due diligence, whether it be with regard to a license such as those offered by Creative Commons or the terms of service agreement on a photo sharing site.

    What has changed since 1980 is not only the format that our media takes but how much easier it has become to copy, remix, and distribute media. That statement had less to do with Creative Commons specifically than it had to do with the philosophy that our culture benefits greatly in the long run from the kinds of remixes and derivations that most creators get defensive about. I have summed this up as "sharing is caring" in previous articles.

    My point is not that artists should throw their work into the street and let the crowds have at it. Rather, Creative Commons offers a legal alternative to those of us who do wish to "give back" now and then without writing up our own licenses or doling out terms of use on a case-by-case basis. Perhaps that's the idealist or the hippie in me talking, but I believe in the power of the remix to shape culture and I believe every artist should recognize the significance of derivative works even if they are opposed to their own work being a source.

    When Robert Rauschenberg created "Erased de Kooning Drawing" by spending about a month literally erasing most of an original de Kooning, he was paving the way for modern art in his time and creating something significantly derivative. What is unique about _Erased de Kooning Drawing_ is that its influence is built on the fact that it was derived from another piece of art. Rauschenberg tried erasing some of his own drawings, but to do that wasn't meaningful.
- id: 1088
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-12-09 22:45:52 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2007-12-10 02:45:52 -0500'
  content: I should also point out that Willem de Kooning was acquainted with Robert
    Rauschenberg and gave him express permission to take that particular piece of
    art and erase it. In today's world, the Creative Commons essentially allows the
    de Koonings of the world to announce to the Rauschenbergs of the world that they
    may do so. In the digital age, however, something can never never really be completely
    erased... They are only copies.
---
Back in June I wrote an article about the Creative Commons project,
[Creative Commons: Good
Idea?](http://www.singleservingphoto.com/2007/06/25/creative-commons-good-idea/,)
in which I advocated the use of their licenses for promotional purposes
and how that approach ties in with socially-driven sites like Wikipedia
and Flickr.

This month the debate over Creative Commons licenses in photography
flared up once more, with Jim Goldstein declaring that he would
_never_ use CC licenses, and Brian Auer retorting that he had before
and would most certainly continue to in the future. Underscoring the
points made by both of these fine fellows was an interview I read with
author Cory Doctorow about giving away free electronic versions of books
that brought many relevant points into play.

I'm revisiting the topic here today, not simply to agree or disagree
with anything Goldstein, Auer, or Doctorow said, but rather to paint a
picture of why I think the Creative Commons plays a very valuable role
in photography in today's copy-and-paste culture and why you should be
thinking very seriously about how it can help you. ~~MORE~~

h2. Creative Commons?

If you haven't heard of them, the Creative Commons is a group focused on
developing new "rights management" tools for creators. Whether you're an
author, painter, musician, or photographer, Creative Commons has
developed "licenses" to allow you to more easily define the prohibitions
and concessions you desire to make regarding the use of your work by
others.

Fundamentally, Creative Commons licenses were developed for creators who
wish to _allow_ uses of their work that typical "all rights reserved"
declarations prohibit. If you never want anyone to use your work for
anything without asking you, you probably don't need the Creative
Commons. You should probably also turn around and walk straight back
through the last few decades because you would be *ignoring everything
that has changed since about 1980*.

Read more about the Creative Commons and their goals on [their
website](http://creativecommons.org/about/.)

h2. Copy-and-Paste Culture

Cory Doctorow put this so elegantly that I will use his words:

bq. It's the 21st century, there's not going to be a year in which it's
harder to copy than this year; there's not going to be a day in which
it's harder to copy than this day; from now on. (([Cory Doctorow on
kottke.org](http://www.kottke.org/07/11/cory-doctorow)))

Before I go further, I want to make it clear that I'm writing this
opinion from the perspective of a fine art photographer. If your
particular photographic enterprise is closer to stock or retail
portraiture or industrial/commercial/product work, much of what I'm
about to say will simply not apply to you. I want to give more than one
perspective, but my opinion is very much formed from an artistic point
of view.

Doctorow continues,

bq. ... if your business model and your aesthetic effect in your
literature and your work is intended not to be copied, you're
fundamentally not making art for the 21st century.

Whatever industry you're in, his statements are true. Consumers of our
creations have historically fought for the ability (if not the
_right_) to copy and redistribute everything we make. The legal
entanglements of Sony's Betamax format greatly publicized the push and
pull between creators and consumers in 1984 when Sony was taken to court
by Universal City Studios. Only the technologies have changed since
then; people will always be excited about multimedia creations and
desire to share them, remix them, and pass them around.

If you accept the proposition that it's culturally and socially
beneficial for creative works to be made (and as photographers, I could
not imagine a world or a situation in which you wouldn't), then you must
also recognize some of the hurdles faced by creators wishing to build
upon the works of their forebears.

I won't go deep into detail; for those interested in reading a truly
revealing look at the state of copyright law and how it affects culture
and creativity, I highly recommend reading attorney and Stanford law
professor Lawrence Lessig's book, [Free
Culture](http://www.free-culture.cc/remixes/.)

So, if you accept all of that, and if you further accept Doctorow's idea
that people are going to make copies (no matter what you do) and that
remixes and mash-ups are fundamentally good for culture (and even for
you, personally), your only concern is how to maximize your recognition
and profits gained from a creative work without strangling the life out
of this copy-and-paste culture we live in.

h2. Some Rights Reserved

What Creative Commons does, in essence, is _formalize_ the concession
of certain usage rights to creative works such that the rights yielded
and the rights retained are drawn up in defensible legal mumbo-jumbo.

==![](/articles/AssistanceCC.jpg)==

This allows a creator to say, for example, "You may use my work to
create new, derived works, and you may distribute those as you see fit,
provided that you credit me and that your work remains under the same
usage rights as this one." _Some_ rights are reserved.

I made the image to the right within the "Mansfield Training Center," an
abandoned hospital for mentally retarded children located in Mansfield,
Connecticut. It came to my attention almost a year ago that someone had
linked to my gallery of images from that hospital within the Wikipedia
article about Mansfield's "sites of interest." It turns out that I have
one of the most "definitive" collections of photographs from that site
from recent years.

I came to the decision that I would release one of my images from the
collection under a Creative Commons license, which is required for all
multimedia content on Wikipedia, so that it could be displayed alongside
the article and increase my exposure as a local artist. I chose the
Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike license (I overlayed the logo
and byline on this image for effect). This license permits derivative
works so long as I am credited and the resulting work is released under
the same license.

Has this gained me a landslide of website traffic from Wikipedia? Not
really. I am of the mind that any amount of exposure is good for
business and for your reputation. I believe that being cited in this
article (the original citation was added by someone else during their
research) increases my overall credibility. Yes, I do think it was worth
it.

h2. Giving It All Away

One of the popular arguments against the Creative Commons paraded about
online is that these licenses may expressly permit uses you, as the
creator, don't agree with. One recent news item involves young Alison
Chang whose picture was taken by a young man in her church group and
placed on Flickr under a CC attribution license. The image was snagged
and used in a billboard campaign by Virgin Mobile in Australia, which
then sparked a legal claim and discussion about licensing of images on
Flickr.

Here are some things you need to know:

* It's always, *always* your responsibility as a creator to
understand the full extent of the concessions granted by a license you
release your work under. If you decide you want to use a Creative
Commons license, you should _actually read it_. Not just the "human
deed," but the full text.\
 * If you don't understand the license... *Don't use it!*\
 * As Dan Heller has frequently advised in discussions about model
releases (this relates specifically to the Alison Chang situation), it
is the responsibility of the person or persons putting your work _into
use_ (e.g. the publisher) to secure model releases. If you did not get
a release when you made the image and the publisher doesn't ask, it is
not your problem.\
 * If you place your work under a license that permits commercial use
and the image is used commercially, you have no recourse. If you did not
secure a model release for individuals pictured therein and they decide
to sue the publisher... That's none of your business!

It is always surprising to me how many people post their images on
various sites and in online communities without understanding the terms
and conditions. As an artist, it is your responsibility to protect your
work from misappropriation and misuse, and that means reading the terms
and conditions of any sites you post your work on.

When Flickr asks you what type of licensing structure you want to use
for your photographs, _choose wisely_. If in doubt, select "all rights
reserved."

It is not the responsibility of the Creative Commons to make abundantly
clear to you what each of their licenses will do. It is your
responsibility to read and understand them before you put them to use.
It is the same with any contract or agreement; ignorance is no excuse.

h2. Conclusions?

I still believe that the judicious use of Creative Commons licenses can
allow you to give back to the artistic community and to our global
culture in a way that nothing else can. By selecting licenses carefully
and releasing certain works through certain avenues, you can be assured
promotional benefits as well as the satisfaction of having contributed
to the world.

Using Creative Commons doesn't mean you stop making money or stop
getting credit.
