---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: 'Photography: What''s the Point?'
author: Aaron
author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
author_url: http://gallery.aaronbieber.com
wordpress_id: 128
wordpress_url: http://www.singleservingphoto.com/2007/06/26/photography-whats-the-point/
date: '2007-06-26 11:55:23 -0400'
date_gmt: '2007-06-26 15:55:23 -0400'
categories:
- Articles
tags:
- art
- discussion
- philosophy
comments:
- id: 850
  author: Christopher Scholl
  author_email: cschollmd@gmail.com
  author_url: http://photographersjourney.com/2007/06/26/its-not-in-the-camera/
  date: '2007-06-26 13:27:13 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-06-26 17:27:13 -0400'
  content: |-
    I couldn't agree with you more.  Pretentiousness is bad and eventually self-destructive in any aspect of life.  It gets you nowhere and accomplishes nothing.

    I just today posted an article on my blog about a fantastic photographer who takes all her pictures with... get this... a camera phone.  Now, how UN-pretentious is that?  To me, that's just brilliant.  And yes, you can argue that a camera phone won't produce images of the same technical quality as my Canon SLR.  But technical quality alone does not make a photograph.  If it did, all those artistic photographers out there shooting with plastic Holgas wouldn't be considered photographers.  And of course they are.

    Thanks for the insightful post.
- id: 851
  author: Aaron
  author_email: aaron@singleservingphoto.com
  author_url: http://gallery.thebailiwick.com
  date: '2007-06-26 16:08:17 -0400'
  date_gmt: '2007-06-26 20:08:17 -0400'
  content: |-
    Thanks, Chris. Whenever the question of equipment arises, I am reminded
    of Ken Rockwell's article, \[The Seven Levels of Photographers\](http://www.kenrockwell.com/tech/7.htm.)
    A lot of people disagree with some of Ken's reviews and opinions, but his description
    of the \"equipment measurbator\" hits the nail right on the head for me. Perhaps
    ironically, the mindset of the equipment measurbator is one that keeps HAM radio
    alive, and as a HAM myself I can say there is definitely fun to be had with equipment
    for its own sake. Nevertheless, art is art is art, no matter what you make it
    with. Maybe a plastic Holga!\r\n\r\nThere is a small sidebar in Wired Magazine
    this month about a site that is aggregating cell phone photos as stock images
    or something. I am going to look it up when I get home and post a link.
- id: 1124
  author: javan
  author_email: jasucaci@fidnet.com
  author_url: http://whatsawebsite?
  date: '2008-01-21 00:16:16 -0500'
  date_gmt: '2008-01-21 04:16:16 -0500'
  content: I just read your article about pretentiousness. I was feeling sorry for
    myself and typed in "photography what's the point" and your website came up. When
    I was in college, I just didn't fit in with the whole art department thing- I
    guess I was too middle class, or something. I was about ready to chuck it all
    when i took my first photo class. I realized that I found somehing I wanted to
    use and I have spent almost 25 years tryinmg to figure out what I wanted to say.
    Along the way I spent a lot of time as a"pro" shooting weddings, portraits, dog
    food, tanpons and whatever else a client wanted to see in 2d. My heart was never
    really into it, and it showed. Lunch hour was always spent walking around downtown
    scared to shoot the street photos that had turned me on to photography in the
    first place. Last year I pulled out my last remaining Diana (I hear the groans)
    and actually shot some stuff that I liked. I just found out the juror didn't like
    it as much as I did. Anyway, does anybody out there want a used Diana?
---
![](/articles/images/WTD210.gif)

Thanks to Aaron Johnson of [What the Duck](http://www.whattheduck.net)
for this eloquent visual synopsis of what I've been thinking about
lately. Too often we get so deeply embroiled in our craft that we forget
why we do it.

A debate has been raging for days on
[Usenet](http://en.wikipedia).org/wiki/Usenet over the question of
whether photography is art and, if so, when it _becomes_ art. Although
the very discussion is futile and has no practical outcome, I do think
it's important to take a step back from what you're doing and think
about what it is you're gaining from it. This is going to be a heady
philosophical post so if that's not your particular brand of vodka,
[read some photo
news](http://www.google.com/reader/shared/user/15563285598058491045/label/photography)
instead.<span id="more"></span><span id="more-128"></span>

While reading related material in preparation for this post, I came
across this quote by famed director and cinematographer [Michelangelo
Antonioni](http://en.wikipedia).org/wiki/Michelangelo_Antonioni that
seemed relevant:

bq. We know that behind every image revealed there is another image more
faithful to reality, and in the back of that image there is another, and
yet another behind the last one, and so on, up to the true image of that
absolute, mysterious reality that no one will ever see.

If something more philosophical could be said about the visual arts, I
would like to hear it. An essential characteristic of photography, and
one that distinguishes it from other arts, is that you are forced to
start with an image from superficial reality, whether that be candid,
posed, documentary, still life, or something else; it must be placed
before the lens and lit. A painter or a sculptor works within the limits
of his or her materials, but the resulting form is summoned completely
from their imagination, from their vision of the materials being
configured in a certain way.

\$random:left\$

Because of this "limitation" ((Limiting only to the extent that a
painter might be limited with _paint_.)) of photography, many people
are drawn to it--as an art form--with the intention of reproducing a
scene for its beauty, emotion, or both (particularly in landscape work)
that is perceived by their eyes and minds. The key word there is
"reproducing." Only secondarily do photographers seek to create
aesthetic contrivances of texture, form, and color, due to their
preoccupation with staying faithful to their experience of the scenes as
they experienced them in Antonioni's _mysterious reality_. In such
realism, the value of the work as art certainly does not decline; Ansel
Adams' entire career was spent realizing such scenic experiences on
paper and to suggest that his legacy of printmaking is not art would be
like telling Leonardo DaVinci that he can't draw. Still, Adams' work is
a prime example of what a concern for pure compositional characteristics
can bring to "observational" or "representational" photography (I use
those words to differentiate Adams' work from "abstract," "documentary,"
and other types of photography, not as editorial terms).

As a photographer, I am almost completely unconcerned with subject
matter for what it is, but rather for what it looks like, and almost
never in the classic sense of observance as is typically the case with
landscapes ("Oooh, pretty mountains!"). The idea that photographs, or
works of art in general, must be imbued with some palpable theme or
emotional message is a preposterous concept made popular by professors
and scholars whose time is spent analyzing art rather than creating it.
Visual art is a powerful method of communicating themes and ideas, but
such ability is not one that need be wielded just for the sake of it. My
work is not abstract, as it does communicate the presence of objects and
places that are recognizable, but I find my interest piqued most by the
geometry, contrast, and texture of my subjects.

\$random:right\$

Part of my development as a photographer has involved moving slowly away
from the urge to create images with some clear meaning simply for the
emotional reaction they ilicit, and toward the creation of images for
their pure compositional strengths. I went to school for graphic design
and my love for it was never tied to the message but rather to its
visual impact, pure and simple.

Each photographer I come in contact with has their own passion and their
own preferred subject matter. Looking back through my own work I can see
how my tastes have developed over time and, I like to think, my skills
as well. Do you look back at your older work and see a change in
preference toward your subject matter? Have you drastically changed
directions as time went on? What are your favorite subjects to
photograph, and what is it about them that makes photographing them
exciting? What would you like to do more of in your work, or is there a
genre you really want to break into?

These are great questions to ask yourself, but if you have a second,
leave your answers in the comments as well so we all can have a chat
about it.
